# Hedging-Of-Crude-Oil-Price-Risks-With-Application-Of-Derivative-Instruments.

When Lord Keynes travelled to Bretton Woods in 1944 in his briefcase were four files to be decided upon by distinguished world financial leaders as the basis for stable economic growth and recovery after the Second World War. Three of these files came to fruition in institutions which we know today as the World Bank, WTO and IMF. The fourth file never saw the light of day – The World Commodity Fund (WTF) – this was considered too big a challenge for struggling post-war economies.

Since then, the best experts of governments and business have tried to solve the economic problems of commodity-dependent countries and businesses. They have experimented with buffer stock, price support mechanisms and other ideas, but most of these schemes have failed. Fortunately, today the modern financial services industry has developed risk management instruments such as derivatives to manage volatile commodity markets such as crude oil.

I chose the topic “Application of Derivative Instruments in Hedging of Crude Price Risks” for my postgraduate diploma thesis because crude oil is by far the most influential commodity in the world and it has recently affected many economies around the globe, not to mention India. Rapid rise in crude oil prices has brought up inflationary pressures and started to hamper economic growth not only in India but also, in many other countries. Furthermore, higher oil prices do not affect only countries but also individuals as crude oil prices have a direct impact on gasoline, gas and heating oil price levels and therefore also onthe budgets of households.

In the context of high oil prices, economists and corporate leaders around the world have started to focus on the possibilities of protecting businesses from the dramatic fluctuations of oil prices. This has been the case particularly among airlines. Therefore, recently the hottest topic among energy end-users and oil companies has been price risk management and hedging. Again, this tendency can be detected among upcoming Indian companies.

Hedging is the process in which an organization with energy price risk will take a position in a derivative instrument that gives an equal and opposite financial exposureto the underlying physical position to protect against major adverse price changes. Hedging and the integration of derivative instruments such as forwards, futures,options and swaps with the cash markets are now an integral part of an oil company’s or energy consumer’s operations in the global oil markets.

Particularly in crude oil there is no such dimension as Indian, Chinese or French market. Crude oil and energy products trading in general is conducted on the global arena and this are also where the so-called rules of the game are set. It is much like the global inter-bank foreign exchange market in a sense that prices are universal and most of the participants besides a few are price-takers.

Crude oil forms the basis of global energy markets and is the most important trendsetter for energy products. The most common strategies used regarding crude oil hedging can also be applied to other energy products as the specifics of various derivative instruments are often similar or even identical. This is the reason why companies worldwide can apply the same strategies to the hedging of price risks of gasoline, diesel oil, heating oil, jet fuel etc.

I try to accomplish the objective of the thesis by studying the current research available on crude oil hedging, by communicating with individuals involved with derivatives and oil market in trading commodity, foreign exchange and equity derivatives. Based on the objective, the thesis is structured into three parts. Section 1 provides an introduction to modern oil industry and explains the importance of crude oil on the global market. Specifics of hedging, basis risk and the structure of the oil market are also analysed.
